hello Russ funds I'm very excited to
announce a brand new series where I'm
going to be delving into the wild world
of GCSE maths now I am very unqualified
to be doing this so I brought along my
good friend a secondary school teacher
mr. Bobby C go from East Ham the London
bard norm I'm studying for a master's in
education I couldn't do this without my
fellow mass appeal podcast co-hosts
hailing from East London favorite topics
percentages probability percentages it's
miss Susan Oh
[Music]
there's a few percentages I think
reporting that everyone should kind of
know and feel confident with okay
one is 50% okay how would you write 50%
less refraction so it's 50 out of 100
get a case that's equal to 50 out of
hundred but some people also know 50% is
also equivalent to system for the
fraction one-half okay
do people know why I wanted to show why
okay so we think our whole is this is a
hundred percent and we want the fifty of
those hundreds if I were to count 50
squares their columns down a 10 so we
got 1 2 3 4 5 so that's effectively 50
squares and if we color in 50 squares
that is hot of our whole ok so that's
where it comes from
ok but we can also convert this to a
decimal by doing 50 divided by a hundred
which the same as 0.5 you've seen that
before yeah so another percentage I
think is very useful for you to know
it's 25% so as a fraction was 25% 2500
which you might also know as if I said
to find 25% of something peoples and
there's another fraction which is more
than one what's F and so to show you why
that is the case if I can't out 25
squared so 1 2 3 4 5 and then 1 2 3 4 5
because it's a square so that's 25
percent which is the same as 1/4 of that
hole okay and then as a decimal which
we're going to be using a bit to do 25
divided by a hundred was equal to 0.25
okay and the reason I keep going back to
this decimal thing is a fact that to
find 25% using a calculator and you can
just type a 0.25 to find 50% you can 5
times by 0.5 to find friendzone you can
times word 0.1 this works for every type
of percentage okay so if I said to find
15% yeah
what's 15% of fraction 50
fifteen over 100 okay
what's it's a decimal 0.15 because that
is 15 divided by a hundred I said to you
what is 15 percent of 40 my calculation
would be 0.15 so that's 50 percent times
40 okay if you've got a calculator
presented is super easy that's all you
need to do is convert your percentage to
a decimal which is just divided by a
hundred than time by your value okay so
if I said she what is 41 percent of 30
what my calculation being the calculator
so 41 percent is 41 but it matures so
that's you're multiplying the x yeah and
then our calculation is 0.41 multiplying
by and so that's a collation you put
that into a calculator and you found 41
percent of 30 tick okay to extend it
just a little bit I want you to think of
the idea of percentage increase increase
okay so we're going to increase
something so if I were to say increase
by 10% what that means is you've got
your original value your original thing
which is a hundred percent and you're
adding on ten percent I shall cut this
in so you understand that idea but what
we want is I'm coloring it
so what Intel have what percentage of it
got my original value so 100 plus the
tenth which is 110 percent is what was a
decimal hundred ten divided
very wonderful so 110 divided by 100 is
equal to one point one so that is our
multiplier so to increase 40 by 10% we
literally do what's a calculation C
times one point one and again there's no
calculating he exists not necessary
we're mathematicians on calculators
indeed the carrot doesn't work for you
but you know what to put in so that's
for an increase decrease similar but
different when we decrease in something
what we're doing making its particular
way so here if I were to say to you
if we were to decrease by 10%
so this is 10% everyone happy with that
yeah and we're going to get rid of that
so what I want is this bit here so I
want the colored in a bit so what
percentage is that hundred billion so
this is ninety percent so to decrease
something by seven percent it's the same
as finding my event so if I said always
my original value and I want to decrease
40 by 10% what's my calculation what's
the same as finding 90% of 40 perfect so
90 percent of 40 and 90 is 90 divided by
a hundred to give us our decimal and
then our calculation is 0.9 times four T
and that's your answer and your
calculator it will help you with that
calculation okay so that is a
whistle-stop tour 20% of amounts find an
increase of percentage and they're also
finding decrease by percentage feeling
confident now you guys have been a
wonderful wonderful pair of students
[Laughter]
[Music]
thank you Miss Susan that introduction
to percentages are now ready to ramp up
so I often go to sports shops as you can
tell I often buy sports ships same
imagine even his shop at the start of
the season and you see by the end of the
season shirts often an out of fashion I
think or new stuff coming out the
following season so for the ending
season in this same sport shop this
shirt
ion's there we go long run and then the
season it's now 20 pounds
so the shop says oh to 80% off and
you're like whoa mom take me there I
need to go to this sports shop so the
question is what is the price tag
accurate not using off I got you from
the starting price so this is the
starting right the end the season on
production special sale okay so how much
has been taken off what percentage been
taking on yeah so based on your teaching
I'm thinking we need to create a
fraction so the 20 pounds is 20 out of
the original 18 hundred percent yeah
yeah so put your 20 out of 80 and that's
gonna be one quarter good because if we
have the squares we can on court
so that means so if one quarter is what
as it as a percentage 25 percent so
that's so 20 pounds is 25 percent of 8
pounds to be taken up how much 75 is
actually the reduction is so how much
would you need to reduce this by to make
it actually so we left with its we left
with 20 percent us I feel reading so
you're doing all that they're multiplyin
reverse of the same thing is a hundred
percent yeah and we're subtracting 80
percent yeah so the new value will be 20
percent oh yeah so 20 percent 80 pounds
yes 20 percent to a fraction
100 yeah decimal 20 divided by 2 okay is
our multiplier so it's not 0.2 times if
my shop was honest 16 pounds but at
least now you will not be ripped off
from a shop I'm still not sure on page
16 balance for a Westham
raise it up
[Music]
thank you for your lesson this is an
excellent lesson of course so you told
us all about percentages and I would
like to take your brilliant teaching and
turn it into a real-life example so when
I think of percentages the first thing
that comes into my head is football
transfers and sellon fees
big money exactly and specifically the
hot topic at the moment Wolfe's aha
Crystal Palace so he was a story all
summer will he won't he leave Crystal
Palace and now the issue was that when
Crystal Palace signed Zaha from an
United my team why do we ever selling
you want to go into that but they did
now at least my nighted were clever
enough to put 20% Selim clause into the
transfer contract so this means that
when Crystal Palace cell workers are 20%
of the total fee will go to mine United
Wow now the reason where one of the main
reasons he never left in the summer is
because Crystal Palace wanted 60 million
pounds yes it's a lot of money Boylan
resides good what is he that's thus
again that's another debate but they
wanted 60 million pounds but if the club
wanting to buy Zahar let's say Arsenal
Everton two of the clubs who tried to
sign him they were prepared to pay 60
million but Crystal Palace would not get
that 60 million this was the problem
because 20 percent of it would go to
money knighted so if Crystal Palace had
sold zahar for 60 million pounds how
much would they actually get so 12
million is 20 percent of the 60
so how much Chris Hollister 60 million
deducting the 12 million it's not quite
so 48 million pounds would go to Crystal
Palace and that's not the 60 million
they wanted Wow so how much to Crystal
Palace have to sell so hard for did you
may get their 60 million your 20% above
60 million because you're gonna take
that 20 percent off so this time we did
it's very similar to one of your
examples but it's a slight change is a
little bit trickier so 60 million is
what Crystal Palace want right so
whatever fee is a is sold for yep
Crystal Palace want to get 80 percent
they sell zafar for X pounds yeah and
there you want to get 60 million yes
which is percent of X for X pounds right
okay so 60 million pounds is equal to
what times X 0.8 0.8 because it's not
the full fee it's 80 percent we want to
work out how much Crystal Palace need to
sell him for which remember is our
unknown variable X what do we do
so normally a masters got a coefficient
we want to find the inverse or we divide
both side by 0.8 exactly so we divide
both sides
eight and that has to equal X and I I
did this one earlier so you may argue
Sahar is not worth sixty million pounds
but Arsenal and Everton supposedly were
willing to pay sixty million pounds but
Crystal Palace wanted sixty million
which meant asked on Everton had to pay
seventy five million and they said that
was too much
oh wow they were gonna pay sixty but
actually would be 75 for quicker palace
to get what they wanted the citizens
exactly it seems that footballers agreed
maybe he's worth sixty million which is
why Crystal Palace won that but because
of this 20 percent sell on fee they
actually the buying team has to pay
seventy five million
[Music]
you